- Title: Sort
- Start Date: 2021-07-20
- Specification PR: [#55](https://github.com/meilisearch/specifications/pull/55)
- Discovery Issue: [#43](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/issues/43)
- MeiliSearch Tracking-issues:

# Sort

## 1. Functional Specification

### I. Summary

The purpose of this specification is to add a **sort** feature at search time to quickly sort the search results as an end-user. Fields called `sortable-attributes` must be known for the search to be usable. These fields can be of type `string` and `number`. We have also introduced a new ranking rule called `sort`, allowing the user to adjust how the sorting should behave. Its position within the ranking rules allows to adjust its behavior according to the needs of exhaustivity and relevancy. We also introduced a `sort` parameter on the search resource to give the end-user the ability to sort the search results according to his needs.

#### Summary Key points

- `sortable-attributes` setting MUST be known by the engine before search time.
- `sort` search parameter MUST be able to operate on multiple fields at search time.  e.g. sort="price:asc,label:desc,...". `string` and `number` fields MUST be supported.
- `sort` ranking rule allows developers to adjust the sorting behavior between exhaustivity and relevancy.

### II. Motivation

According to our user feedback, the lack of a sorting feature is mentioned as one of the biggest deal-breakers for choosing MeiliSearch as a search engine. A search engine must be able to offer this feature, especially for e-commerce use. Moreover, competitors all offer it. Today, users must find workarounds that take time to develop and maintain to sort search results.

We want to offer a simple and versatile solution for their needs.

### III. Explanation

#### **As a developer, I want to configure the sortable attributes so that the end-user can sort results.**

- Introduce a new `sortableAttributes` field in the global settings resource schema.
- Introduce a new `/sortable-attributes` sub-setting resource.

**`sortableAttributes` field definition**

- Name: `sortableAttributes`
- Type: Array[String]
- Default: []

**GET settings** `/indexes/{indexUid}/settings`

200 - Response with empty `sortableAttributes` (default case)
```
{
    ...,
    "sortableAttributes": []
    ...
}
```

200 - Response with already configured `sortableAttributes`
```
{
    ...,
    "sortableAttributes": ["price", "released_date"]
    ...
}
```

💡 The values order in `sortableAttributes` has no impact. The order will be determined at search time from the `sort` parameter.

**POST settings** `/indexes/{indexUid}/settings`

Request body
```
{
    ...,
	"sortableAttributes": ["price", "released_date", "title"],
    ...
}
```

202 Accepted - Response body
```
{
    "updateId": 7
}
```

- 💡 Sending an inexistent field WON'T throw an error. It is possible to define settings before indexing documents so we accept fields that may not yet exist within a document.
- 💡 `sortableAttributes` accepts `null` and `[]` values to be reset.
🔴 Sending other than string value as array item results in a 400 bad request - **invalid_request_error**.

**DELETE settings** `/indexes/{indexUid}/settings`

💡 Resetting all settings will result to the default case e.g. `sortableAttributes: []`

202 Accepted - Response body
```
{
    "updateId": 8
}
```

**GET settings/sortable-attributes** `/indexes/{indexUid}/settings/sortable-attributes`

200 - Response body (Default case)
```
[]
```

200 - Response body with `sortableAttributes` already configured
```
[
    "price",
    "released_date"
]
```

- 🔴 If a master key is set and missing from the client, the new GET `settings/sortable-attributes` API method is protected and returns a 401 Unauthorized `missing_authorization_header`.
- 🔴 If the index is not found, a 404 Not Found response is returned.

**POST settings/sortable-attributes** `/indexes/{indexUid}/settings/sortable-attributes`

Request body
```
[
    "price",
    "released_date",
    "title"
]
```

202 Accepted - Response body
```
{
    "updateId": 7
}
```

- 💡 Sending an inexistent field WON'T throw an error. It is possible to define settings before indexing documents so we accept fields that may not yet exist within a document.
- 💡 POST request body accept null and [] values to reset the `sortableAttributes`.
- 🔴 Sending other than string value as array item results in a 400 bad request - **invalid_request_error**.
- 🔴 If a master key is set and missing from the client, the new POST `settings/sortable-attributes` API method is protected and returns a 401 Unauthorized `missing_authorization_header`.
- 🔴 If the index is not found, a 404 Not Found response is returned.

**DEL settings/sortable-attributes** `/indexes/{indexUid}/settings/sortable-attributes`

202 Accepted - Response body
```
{
    "updateId": 8
}
```
- 🔴 If a master key is set and missing from the client, the new DELETE `settings/sortable-attributes` API method is protected and returns a 401 Unauthorized `missing_authorization_header`.
- 🔴 If the index is not found, a 404 Not Found response is returned.

#### **As an End-User, I want to specify a `sort` parameter at search time so that I can sort search result in ascending/descending order from document attributes, whether they are `numeric` or `string`.**

- Introduce a `sort` parameter on GET/POST `/search` methods.

**GET Search /indexes/{indexUid}/search**

`sort` - String - E.g. `sort="price:asc,released_date:desc"`

> `:asc`

**POST Search /indexes/{indexUid}/search**

`sort` - Array[String] - E.g.

Request body
```
{
    ...,
    "sort": [
        "price:asc",
        "released_date:desc"
    ],
    ...
}
```

🔴 Sending a value not set in `sortableAttribute` will lead to a 400 Bad Request - **invalid_sort** error.

```
{
    "message": "attribute `title` is not sortable, available sortable attributes are: ..., ...",
    "errorCode": "invalid_sort",
    "errorType": "invalid_request_error",
    "errorLink": "https://docs.meilisearch.com/errors#invalid_sort"
}
```

🔴 Sending a wrong formatted value will lead to a 400 Bad Request - **invalid_sort**.

We want to align the way custom ordering rules are written with the syntax of the `sort` search parameter.

Current custom ranking rule definition syntax
```
[
    "asc(title)",
    ...
]
```
become
```
[
    "title:asc"
]
```

**Search example with `sort`**

With this set of document
```
[
    {
        "id": 1,
        "label": "Vans Classic II sweatshirt in black",
        "price": 52.00,
        "colors": ["black"],
        "sizes": ["xs", "s", "m", "m", "xl"],
        "reviews_rating": 4.5
    },
    {
        "id": 2,
        "label": "The North Face Drew Peak hoodie in green",
        "price": 36.00,
        "colors": ["green"],
        "reviews_rating": 4.89
    },
    {
        "id": 3,
        "label": "Nike Club hoodie in navy",
        "price": 52.00,
        "colors": ["navy"],
        "reviews_rating": 4.7
    }
]
```

With this ranking rules definition
```
[
    "sort",
    "typo",
    "sort",
    "proximity",
    "attribute",
    "exactness"
]
```

And with this `sortableAttributes` definition
```
[
    "price",
    "reviews_rating"
]
```

**POST Search**

Request Body
```
{
    ...,
    "sort" = [
        "price:asc",
        "reviews_rating:desc"
    ]
}
```

200 - Response
```
{
    "hits": [
        {
            "id": 2,
            "label": "The North Face Drew Peak hoodie in green",
            "price": 36.00,
            "colors": ["green"],
            "reviews_rating": 4.89
        },
        {
            "id": 3,
            "label": "Nike Club hoodie in navy",
            "price": 52.00,
            "colors": ["navy"],
            "reviews_rating": 4.7
        },
        {
            "id": 1,
            "label": "Vans Classic II sweatshirt in black",
            "price": 52.00,
            "colors": ["black"],
            "sizes": ["xs", "s", "m", "m", "xl"],
            "reviews_rating": 4.5
        }
    ]
}
```

As we can see `sort` is the most important criterion in play according to the ranking rules ordering. Moreover, we see that the `sort` search parameter is able to handle several attributes. The priorities are determined from left to right, so the `price` field is more important, if N documents share the same price value they are sorted by `reviews_rating` and so on.


#### **As a Developer, I want to change the position of the `sort` ranking rule so that I tweak the behavior of the `sort` ranking rule between exhaustivity and relevancy.**

**GET settings/ranking-rules** `/indexes/{indexUid}/settings/ranking-rules`

200 - Response body (Default case)
```
[
    "words",
    "typo",
    "sort",
    "proximity",
    "attribute",
    "exactness"
]
```

**POST settings/ranking-rules**

Request body
```
[
    "sort",
    "words",
    "typo",
    "proximity",
    "attribute",
    "exactness"
]
```

202 Accepted - Response body
```
{
    "updateId": 7
}
```

- ℹ️ The position of the sort ranking rule is significant. The higher it is, the more critical it will be. The lower it is, the less important it will be and the other rules will take priority. It allows the developer to adjust the behavior between exhaustivity and relevancy with the sort criterion. Knowing this, if `sort`ranking rule is in the last position you will sort very relevant results.

**Real condition explanation**

e.g. Relevant Sort

I want a relevant sort (sort on relevant items). I put sort at the latest level of my ranking rules.

```
[
  "typo",
  "words",
  "proximity",
  "attribute",
  "exactness",
  "sort"
]
```

At search time, if I use (knowing that price and reviews_rating have been set as sortable-attributes previously)
```
{
    "q": "Mac Book",
    "sort": [
        "price:asc",
        "reviews_rating:desc"
    ]
}
```

Ranking rules can virtually be represented that way for this search request.

```
[
  "typo",
  "words",
  "proximity",
  "attribute",
  "exactness",
  "price:asc", //First part of the `sort` ranking rule.
  "reviews_rating:desc" //Second part of the `sort`ranking rule.
]
```

Note that if I change the `sort` parameter's value order, it changes the inner element of the `sort` ranking rule.

```
{
    "q": "Mac Book",
    "sort": [
        "reviews_rating:desc",
        "price:asc"
    ]
}
```

```
[
  "typo",
  "words",
  "proximity",
  "attribute",
  "exactness",
  "reviews_rating:desc" //The ordering of inner elements of the sort ranking rule is made from the order of the `sort` query/request parameter.
  "price:asc",
]
```

### IV. Finalized Key Changes

- Add `sortableAttributes` parameter in settings schema.
- Add `sortable-attributes` API ressource.
- Add a `sort` ranking rule.
- Add `sort` query/request parameter on `/search` ressource. Support `string` and `number`. `string` can be sorted in lexicographical order.
- Change custom ranking rule format. e.g. `asc(price)` become `price:asc`
- Add a new error `invalid_sort` similar to `invalid_filter`.

## 2. Technical details

### I. Measuring
- Number of sorted attributes used in `sort` search parameter to calculate an avg per server.
- `ranking-rules` setting definition to evaluate position customization.
- Number of `sortableAttributes` to calcule an avg per server.

## 3. Future Possibilities
- Support sort on nested fields
- Support computational functions avg, sum, min, max, median. For now, the workaround is to pre-compute values in the document before indexing and sort them at search time with a `sort` on the pre-computed field. e.g. sort="precomputed_avg_price:desc".
- Ability to set a custom ranking rules order at search time. Out of scope from the `sort`.